today is november 9th which means our
coaching program is now live
even though our program isn't designed
to treat depression or anxiety our
clients experience about a 15 to 20
reduction in depression and about a 15
to 16
reduction in anxiety for more
information or to sign up check out the
link below
hey guys dr k here now i want to talk a
little bit about anxiety and hopefully
help you all understand a little bit
more about
what is anxiety how does it actually
function
and once we understand what it is and
what it's supposed to be doing we can
start to get a sense of how to overcome
it
so anxiety is essentially our brain's
capacity to predict
danger and warn us about it it gives us
the opportunity to look into the future
see or anticipate problems therefore we
can take corrective actions now
to prevent bad outcomes that's
essentially what anxiety is
consider being worried about looking
stupid at a party
or afraid that you're going to fail a
test or being afraid that you're going
to get rejected from a job interview
all of these things are examples of our
mind looking into the future
examining things analyzing things and
warning us about danger so that we can
do something about it
and so essentially what happens when our
mind worries is it's making predictions
of bad outcomes in the future
in a hope that it can warn us about it
we can kind of do something to correct
or prevent it so anxiety is essentially
our ability to see
problems and consider consequences
anxiety is when our mind has thoughts of
the future
usually associated with negative
consequences it involves predicting the
impact of current
actions into the future and specifically
how
painful the future will be if we in a
particular way now
we tend to talk about anxiety like an
illness but if we look at the
fundamental function of worry
let's not forget that most of the time
worry isn't a bad thing it's actually a
good thing we're wired for it it's
something that our brain is telling us
to
to do so let's try to unpack anxiety a
little bit further and we're going to go
through
two examples kind of as we sort of
analyze anxiety
and those two examples are going to be
being afraid of looking dumb
or offending people at a party or being
afraid that what we're going to do
poorly on a test
so the first thing that we need to look
at is both of these examples
involve you right so anxiety involves
thinking about you and the consequences
that
you may or may not take usually
you start with yourself and you look
into the future the reason you do this
is you try to figure out all the
possible
solutions to prevent bad outcomes
and so anxiety tends to focus on some
kind of insecurity
oftentimes with you but it could be an
insecurity about someone else
your sense of your own capability or
what you're not good at
so in the case of looking dumb or
offending people you may not have
confidence in yourself as a person
somewhere along the way you discover
that people may not like you very much
or that the only time they like you is
if you kind of put on a particular mask
or you put on a show
and that they they like that version of
you but not the real version of you
you may believe that you're just not as
as charismatic as other people
you may find yourself comparing yourself
to a lot of other people
but at the end of the day there's an
insecurity about your likability as a
person
in the case of studying you may be
afraid of failing or
fear that you haven't studied enough you
may recognize that other people can be
confident once again there's going to be
comparison there
but something just makes you worried
that you're not going to do good enough
or you're afraid of doing good enough or
you're afraid of being good enough
sometimes people consider anxiety as
stemming from the past
now i sort of say that anxiety is the
future focused mind
but people will say but i have anxiety
about the past let's just tunnel down
into that tangent for a second
people will say oh i messed up last
night and if people
you know people are gonna dislike me
today because i was dumb
yesterday at the party or yesterday in
class i asked a stupid question
so now everyone is gonna think i'm
stupid and so they pause for a second
and they kind of look back and they say
oh i made a mistake yesterday i'm
anxious about that
but if you really look at it what
they're doing is they're looking at an
event in the past
and they're still projecting the
consequences into the future
so all anxiety involves looking into the
future
and even though you can be worried about
something that happened in the past if
you
really pay attention what you're what
you're really looking at is you're
worried about the consequences
that could evolve from actions that
happen in the past
so we see that anxiety is about
predicting possible problems that
arise and now we get into another
interesting tidbit about anxiety is that
since anxiety is about making
predictions the smarter you are the more
computing power you have to make
predictions
and this is really really unfortunate
because what i find time and time again
as a clinician
is that the smarter you are the worse or
more crippling your anxiety can be
the more that your mind is able to
compute potential futures the more
potential problems that your mind will
tell you to worry about
and so it's really unfortunate but
generally speaking the smarter you are
the worse your anxiety is and so now
that we kind of sort of
dug into a little bit about the you
component of anxiety
let's look at what the mind does with
responding to anxiety
so what does the mind do when we
actually experience anxiety
how do we deal with these worries in the
future the short answer is that
uncertainty is really frightening so
what we try to do is to remove the
uncertainty
most of anxiety involves an if then sort
of statement so we see the then portion
so if i say this then people are going
to think this right if i go to the party
and i speak up people are going to
dislike me
if i don't study enough i'm going to
fail the test and so
it's kind of like an if then statement
and so what we try to do is we try to
fix
the then right we try to alleviate
our anxiety by essentially controlling
something in the future
and we may think a little bit about
overcompensating
so let's take the example of you know i
cracked a joke about someone and maybe
they're upset
by it let me just apologize just in case
even if you
didn't say anything offensive a lot of
times people with with anxiety are so
concerned about it that they'll
overcompensate
and try to control that future in the
event that this person is offended
let me remove that uncertainty and just
apologize just in case
the other thing that we try to do to
sort of control the future
or remove the uncertainty is to not
trigger it at all right so if we avoid
the situation entirely
then we can control any potential
negative outcomes that happen
so if i don't even show up at the party
i can't misspeak
i won't people won't think i'm stupid
and so how about i just don't go
i can control that worry completely by
avoiding the situation
entirely and for people who are worried
about failing a test
they'll study extra hard because we're
they're so afraid of failing
and so they kind of do as much as they
can to control the uncertainty of the
future
by sort of changing something in the
here and now
and this may sound like sort of a good
thing in a sense right like if i'm
studying
extra for a test like isn't that a good
thing the problem is that oftentimes our
solutions for anxiety our desire to
exert control
is very restrictive and actually causes
us to suffer
so if we think about the social example
like sure if i don't go to the party
you know no one can think i'm dumb
because i'm not there but then i never
go to parties
and so i actually narrow the scope of my
life and i start to restrict
the kind of things that i can do and
even in the case of studying we're so
paranoid that that
we're going to fail a test that we skip
parties or social events or don't hang
out with friends
or we stay up way too late or we wake up
way early in the morning
we miss out on a lot of fun that you can
have when you're a student
by studying way too hard and this is the
really damnable thing which is that
anxiety oftentimes has positive benefits
let's not forget that anxiety is
actually there for a reason and the
reason it exists is because generally
speaking it helps us out
so for example if you look at medical
students
a lot of medical students have high
levels of anxiety and that's part of the
reason they got into medical school in
the first place
because when everyone was out partying
they were the ones who were on a friday
night
at 10 p.m in the library studying for a
test
and so even though it the event anxiety
could be
advantageous for us at times generally
speaking we want to be really careful
because if we give into it and we try to
control those
uncertainties it actually restricts us
or causes us to suffer
even though it may give us some kind of
material advantage in life
the other issue is that oftentimes with
anxiety since we're so
concerned we actually end up over
compensating which can make the problem
worse
right so if we're concerned that people
don't like us and we apologize to
profusely
then what can happen is we can actually
be kind of annoying and make people not
like us because we're afraid
or we're trying to fix the fact that
we're they don't like us that creates a
really dangerous loop
i'm afraid someone doesn't like me let
me apologize
since i'm apologizing too much and
inappropriately
i annoy them and then they end up not
liking me right it's this
weird self-fulfilling prophecy or
vicious cycle
and so it's our solution to the anxiety
that actually causes our suffering
makes our life a little bit more
restricted and actually creates problems
and the last really really sad and
unfortunate thing about anxiety is that
sometimes if we give into it other
people can take advantage of our
insecurity
so if you if you are super anxious
sometimes you can behave a little bit
like a doormat right you're apologizing
all the time
and sometimes you're going to run across
people who never want to
admit that they did anything wrong and
so they're more than happy to have
someone around
who is always apologizing for
things that aren't their fault makes it
a super convenient bearing
so it can be really dangerous because
sometimes our anxiety
results in people taking advantage of us
and so how do we deal with this right so
sure we've got this issue of okay
anxiety is our mind
our predictive capability focusing
on particular problems in the future
based on our on
a sense of uncertainty and insecurity
usually in ourselves
so what do we do about that right so i'm
insecure in myself and i'm predicting
all these problems and i'm a smart
person so i
make a lot of predictions and then i try
to control that uncertainty by
avoiding parties or restricting what i
do so how do we break out of this what
do we do about it
the first thing to understand is that
anxiety is literally the mind thinking
in the future
if we can bring the mind to the present
it's it's literally impossible to be
anxious i know it sounds completely
crazy
but if you look at the experience of
anxiety your mind
is thinking about the future and so
anytime you're thinking about the
present or focused in the present
you can't be anxious good examples of
this are like let's say you take a bath
or like a nice hot shower
and if you're immersed in the experience
of taking the shower or the bath
you won't be thinking about other things
and you can't experience
anxiety and we deal with anxiety in all
kinds of ways by bringing our mind to
the present some of these can actually
be harmful but we can
see this in things like games or
watching videos or watching tv shows or
movies
or even substances when we play video
games for example like our mind stops
thinking
in that future and starts focusing on
the game and then what happens to our
anxiety it melts away
if we get engrossed in a tv show or
something like that
then once again we're not thinking in
the future and we're not thinking about
ourselves we're thinking about something
else
and so the anxiety falls away sometimes
people will use substances like
marijuana or alcohol and those certainly
help with anxiety as well
and how do they help with it they sort
of keep our mind it's a biological
substance that helps our mind focus a
little bit more in the present
right and so i'm not advising that these
things are actually good in fact i think
all three of these are poor choices to
deal with anxiety
but let's try to map out a full spectrum
of how we do deal with anxiety and then
we can sort of
start to shift gears a little bit
towards healthier methods of coping with
anxiety
so the key thing still remains that
anxiety literally cannot exist
if you're not thinking about the future
and
a good example of this is sometimes
people will have you know anxiety about
let's say going to a party or failing a
test
and if you really look at people's
experience once they sit down and they
start to study right once you get
engrossed in the act of studying
then the anxiety sort of melts away once
you actually show up to the party and
you stop kind of thinking about it and
you start engaging with people
for those of you that are a little bit
lucky and can focus in those
experiences then the anxiety disappears
right we can also use like stage anxiety
or performance anxiety
is a good example that you're really
really worried when you go up on stage
but once you actually get up on stage
hopefully you start to feel way better
another great example of that is jumping
into a cold swimming pool
where before you jump into the water oh
my god oh my god it's gonna be so cold
it's gonna be so cold it's gonna be so
cold it's paralyzing you
but once you actually jump into the
water generally speaking the anxiety was
far more paralytic
than the reality of jumping into the
water
and so if we can sort of engage in the
activity
then the anxiety will actually start to
melt away
so the second thing to kind of think
about so just to summarize you know if
we can bring our mind to the present if
we can actually go ahead
and jump in the water if we can engage
in an activity
if we can move away from the future if
we can train our mind
to focus in the present then anxiety
literally cannot exist
staggering okay the next thing to think
about
is that remember anxiety is rooted in
some kind of insecurity
right so if we think about the cases in
which we're not anxious
so you may not be anxious hanging out
with your dog well
why is that it's because you know you
have confidence that your dog likes you
as a person
if you think about even like playing a
competitive video game
why aren't you anxious when you go into
the game it's because you have
confidence in your skill
in the video game even that you may win
or you may lose but you're kind of
confident with your ability to face that
uncertainty
it's kind of weird right because in a
game you don't really know whether
you're going to win you don't know
whether you're going to lose but you
have faith in yourself or your skill in
the game
and so therefore you can face that
uncertainty
so the second big way to focus on or fix
anxiety is not just to kind of bring the
mind to the present but it's to focus on
the insecurity itself
and what do i mean by that it's to
develop confidence
so let's think about what confidence
really means
so confidence is literally believing
that you have the capacity
to deal with the unknown and
let's kind of think about that for a
second right because if we think about
how anxiety functions
normally what we do is there's
uncertainty in the future
and so what we try to do is we try to
control that uncertainty right
we don't face the uncertainty we try to
remove the uncertainty
and so every time that you remove the
uncertainty you
lose the chance to build confidence
because confidence comes from
when you face something and overcoming
the challenge not
taking the challenge away and so a lot
of our solutions to our anxiety
about controlling our future actually
prevent us from developing the
confidence that we need to really
overcome anxiety
and i know this sounds absolutely crazy
but when we start to control
certain circumstances of our life we
actually make our anxiety worse
because we decrease our confidence
because we're never actually facing
anything
we just avoid playing the game entirely
and so the other big solution really is
to
sort of learn how to develop some
confidence and we can go into more
detail with that down the road
but essentially resolve that personal
insecurity that you have um and then as
you resolve that personal insecurity
you're able to face
uncertainty without needing to control
it
and when you don't need to control your
life then your life becomes
less restrictive and you become more
free
so to summarize anxiety is essentially
the future focused mind
that revolves around a particular
insecurity
and the smarter you are the more
problems you begin to see
out in the future and generally speaking
what people do with anxiety is they
they try to distract themselves or they
try to control
their future they try to remove
uncertainty from the equation
and so generally speaking what we want
to do is be really really careful
because a lot of our solutions
for anxiety actually make our anxiety
worse
and what we want to wind up doing
instead is actually learn how to focus
our mind in the present
right so if we can bring our mind to the
task at hand
then anxiety literally can't exist
because anxiety by definition is us
thinking about the future
so you can unplug into anxiety entirely
by focusing on the present
the second thing that you can do is
develop confidence
in relation to your insecurities and
what that
helps us do is the more confident we
become the more that we can face the
uncertainty of anxiety
because remember anxiety is if then
statements if happens then what am i
going to do
if this happens then what am i going to
do this happens in what i'm going to do
and if you become confident yourself
you're like okay if that happens
i'll handle it if this happens we'll
cross that bridge when we come to it
and if i offend someone and they don't
like me well then they don't like me and
if i did something wrong i'll apologize
and if i didn't then no big deal
not everyone has to like me terrifying
thoughts for someone
with anxiety but our goal here is to try
to help you guys learn a little bit more
about
anxiety and a little bit more about how
to develop these solutions
so that you can ultimately conquer it
and it doesn't have to plague you
all the time so i hope that was helpful
thanks for listening
and adios from dr k
you